

# Synthesis Problem for Petri Nets with Localities

Transactions on Petri Nets and Other Models of Concurrency V pp 160-180




---

# Model Checking of Biological Systems

International School on Formal Methods for the Design of Computer, Communication and Software Systems
SFM 2013: Formal Methods for Dynamical Systems pp 63-112

There are two fundamental types of biological networks – reaction networks and
regulatory networks. Recent network reconstructions typically mix the two. 

**Reaction networks** provide a detailed view of underlying biochemical interactions
– nodes are chemical species and stoichiometry-labeled (multi-)edges represent
elementary chemical reactions. 

**Regulatory networks** are higher level and focus
on feedbacks among individual system components – nodes are species or abstract biological objects and edges represent positive or negative influence. Gene regulatory networks make a typical example

On the other hand, executable models employ abstract representations to explain biological phenomena. Examples of widely used formalisms are Boolean
networks [159,50,121], Petri Nets [103,32,49,143], timed automata [27,153,97],
compact process algebraic representations such as BioPEPA [56], Kappa [68] or
suitable adaptations of π-calculus [141,145]. 

Qualitative reachability properties express reachability of specified concentration levels in given model variables

Model checking techniques for the analysis of biological systems can be roughly
divided into exhaustive techniques and monitoring techniques. The exhaustive
techniques consist of checking whether all executions – state-event sequences –
generated by a given system S, satisfy the inspected property described as the
formula ϕ, i.e., they effectively decide the language inclusion S ⊆ ϕ (ϕ is
the set of all executions that satisfy ϕ). In order to generate all executions, the
whole state-space has to be stored and evaluated. This is why the exhaustive
techniques generally suffer from the state-space explosion problem. 

the monitoring techniques are based on the
membership test ω ∈ ϕ of an individual simulation trace ω ∈ S, where the
responsibility for exhaustive coverage is delegated to the procedure that generates the traces. The key observation behind their efficiency is that for large and
complex systems, the simulation is generally easier and faster than building a
concise representation of global transition systems required for the exhaustive
model checking approach


Breach, a toolbox for verification and parameter synthesis of hybrid systems
https://swmath.org/software/20822


https://sybila.fi.muni.cz/tools

**Kripke structure**

Models with propositionally labeled states can be described in terms of Kripke structures. More formally, a Kripke structure is a quadruple , where S is a set of states, R is the transition relation between states using one of the enabled operators, I is the set of initial states, and  is a state labeling function.

---

# Generalized mapping for multiset rewriting systems

Soft Computing volume 25, pages11439–11448 (2021)

Parikh mappings (vectors) express properties of words of a context-free language as numerical properties of vectors yielding some fundamental language-theoretic consequences. Parikh mapping is used in diverse areas of applications, for example, in text finger printing (Amir et al. 2003).

It first defines a mapping on multiset spaces and presents several of its properties and counter examples. Secondly, the new mapping has been shown to possess many nice properties in relation to pattern recognition measures of multisets such as cardinality, distance and similarity. This mapping has further been applied to Parikh and Khomenko models through suitable representation schemes and Nazmul and Hickman models as its special cases. The mapping rewrites multisets and thus enables one to model paradigms such as P systems, Petri Nets, Abstract Rewriting on Multisets (ARMS) and Abstract Chemical Machines. The paper also gives several fundamental results. By defining the notion of constant multisets, it shows that set theoretic forms of law of excluded middle and law of non-contradiction do not hold for multisets. This is the motivation to introduce m-coincidence to handle disjoint multisets.

--- 

# Interactomes, manufacturomes and relational biology: analogies between systems biology and manufacturing systems

Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling volume 8, Article number: 19 (2011) 

We describe anticipatory systems, or long-range feed-forward chemical reaction chains, and compare them to open-loop manufacturing processes. We then close the loop by discussing metabolism-repair systems and describe the rationality of the self-referential equation f = f (f). This relationship is derived from some boundary conditions that, in molecular systems biology, can be stated as the cardinality of the following molecular sets must be about equal: metabolome, genome, proteome. We show that this conjecture is not likely correct so the problem of self-referential mappings for describing the boundary between living and nonliving systems remains an open question. We calculate a lower and upper bound for the number of edges in the molecular interaction network (the interactome) for two cellular organisms and for two manufacturomes for CMOS integrated circuit manufacturing.

The primary, and still the main work, on category theory to biology is Rosen [3, 22, 23]. He defines it as relational biology.


Letelier et al. [29] has suggested the further, reasonable, constraint:

|A| ≈ |B| ≈ |M | ≈ |S|. This says that the number of reactants | A |, is about equal to the number of products | B |, and is about equal to the number of enzymes | M |, and is about equal to the number of repair operators | S |. When we consider the enzymes as the processing machines for the metabolism, then we must also recall that enzymes are produced by the metabolism system. The genome, proteome, metabolome cannot be separated. It is a complex molecular network, and as we will show below the relation |A| ≈ |B| ≈ |M| ≈ |S| is not likely valid.

Using the language above, when an enzyme, M i needs to be repaired, essentially that means there is insufficient quantity of that molecular species for it to participate as a catalyst. The insufficient quantity triggers a threshold to induce some gene to begin a reaction to produce more (a genetic switch in Kauffman's [5] terminology). This is obviously all driven by Le Chatelier's principle: If a chemical systems at equilibrium experiences a change in concentration, temperature, volume or partial pressure, then the equilibrium will shift to counterbalance the change [33]. The complex interactome network is a network of complex irreversible nonequlibrium thermodynamics [34], and summarized by the very-high level commutative mapping shown in Figure 4.

The above suggests two possible tests of MR-systems theory. First the conditions |A| ≈ |B| ≈ |M | ≈ |S| could be investigated by data-mining. The cardinality of these four sets should be about equal. Figure 5 shows the protein-protein interaction network for the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae from Y2H experiments and represents "possible" biophysically meaningful interactions. Yu et al. [35] estimate about 18,000 ± 4500 binary protein-protein interactions are possible. Because they did not have all the ORFs for the screening they obtained 2930 binary interactions consisting of 2018 unique proteins giving an average degree, or node valance, of 1.45, computed as a ratio of interactions/proteins.

At the cellular biology scale, the seemingly infinite recursion of the compact version of this map, f (f) = f, can be explained as the fact that the genome, proteome, metabolome are all interrelated. Components and machine parts from the proteome are used in processing the metabolome. Components and machine parts from the proteome are used in resynthesis of the proteome components all the while making use of the metabolome and genome.

---

# Anticipatory Systems

Anticipatory Systems pp 313-370

Robert Rosen


n biology, senescence is an almost ubiquitous property of organisms, but at present it remains one of the most poorly understood. The concept of senescence, being intimately concerned with mortality, has proved as difficult to define as life itself. Senescence is also closely related to the concepts of time and age, which we saw in Sect. 6.4 above to be exceedingly complex in themselves. Perhaps the most satisfactory working definition, which has been adopted by most of those concerned with senescence phenomena, is the following: 

**senescence is an increase in the probability of death per unit time with chronological age.**

Put somewhat more picturesquely, senescence is an increase in the force of mortality with time. Such a definition is incomplete and unsatisfactory in many ways, as we shall see; but it will serve as a point of departure. Moreover, it explicitly calls attention to the basic conceptual notions involved: time, age, mortality.

**any system possessing an anticipatory step exhibits properties which are temporally spanned** and **such a temporal spanning represents a kind of global failure which is independent of any local subsystem failures**

Under appropriate circumstances, as we have seen, the more adaptive the subsystem (i.e. the more effectively parasitic its behavior) the greater is the decline of fitness of the overall system, including the parasite. Because of the disparity of time scales in the local and global selection mechanisms, and precisely because the observables determining global fitness are generally not directly perceptible by the subsystems, the catastrophic effects ultimately generated thereby are not manifested until it is too late for the subsystems to re-adapt.


---

# Modelling Ammonium Transporters in Arbuscular Mycorrhiza Symbiosis

Transactions on Computational Systems Biology XIII pp 85-109

The Stochastic Calculus of Wrapped Compartments (**SCWC**) is a recently proposed variant of the Stochastic Calculus of Looping Sequences (**SCLS**), a language for the representation and simulation of biological systems. In this work we apply SCWC to model a newly discovered ammonium transporter. This transporter is believed to play a fundamental role for plant mineral acquisition, which takes place in the arbuscular mycorrhiza, the most wide-spread plant-fungus symbiosis on earth. Investigating this kind of symbiosis is considered one of the most promising ways to develop methods to nurture plants in more natural manners, avoiding the complex chemical productions used nowadays to produce artificial fertilizers.

---

# PhyChip: Growing Computers with Slime Mould

Computational Matter pp 111-128

In 2011 the agency opened the ICT FP7 Call 8 FET Proactive in Unconventional Computation1, and for associated Coordination Actions. As a
result, seven research projects were funded:
• BIOMICS: Biological and Mathematical Basis of Interaction Computing
(Dini et al., 2012), www.biomicsproject.eu
• MICREAgents: MIcroscopic Chemically Reactive Electronic Agents (McCaskill et al., 2012), www.micreagents.eu
• MolArNet: Molecular Architectures for QCA-inspired Boolean Networks
(Rinaldi et al., 2012), www.molarnet.eu
• Multi: Multi-Valued and Parallel Molecular Logic (Collini et al., 2012),
www.multivalued.eu
• NASCENCE: NAnoSCale Engineering for Novel Computation using Evolution (Broersma et al., 2012), www.nascence.eu
• PhyChip: Growing Computers from Slime Mould (Adamatzky et al.,
2012), www.phychip.eu
• SYMONE: SYnaptic MOlecular NEtworks for Bio-inspired Information
Processing (Wendin et al., 2012), www.symone.eu
One coordination action was also funded:
• TRUCE: Training and Research in Unconvention Computation in Europe (Amos et al., 2012), www.truce-project.eu


Physarum polycephalum belongs to the species of order Physarales, subclass
Myxogastromycetidae, class Myxomycetes, division Myxostelida. It is commonly known as a true, acellular or multi-headed slime mould. Plasmodium
is a ‘vegetative’ phase, a single cell with a myriad of diploid nuclei. The plasmodium is visible to the naked eye. The plasmodium looks like an amorphous
yellowish mass with networks of protoplasmic tubes

The unique features of P. polycephalum are, following Adamatzky (2010):
• Physarum is a living, dynamical reaction-diffusion pattern formation
mechanism.
• Physarum may be considered as equivalent to a membrane bound sub
excitable system (excitation stimuli provided by chemo-attractants and
chemo-repellents).
• The complex patterning (reticulate networks, dendritic patterns) is equivalent to parts of the continuum of Turing structure patterns.
• Physarum efficiently exploits — or outsources — external computation
by the environment via the sensing and suppression of nutrient gradients
• Physarum may be regarded as a highly efficient and living micro-manipulation and micro-fluidic transport device
• The induction of pattern type is determined partly by the environment,
specifically nutrient quality and substrate hardness, dryness, etc.
• Physarum is thus a computational material based on modification of protoplasm transport by presence of external stimuli.
• Physarum is sensitive to illumination and AC electric fields and therefore
allows for parallel and non-destructive input of information
• Physarum represents results of computation by configuration of its body.

In terms of classical computing architectures, the following characteristics
can be attributed to Physarum chips:
• Massive parallelism: there are thousands of elementary processing units,
oscillatory bodies, in a slime mould colonised in a Petri dish;
• Homogeneity: Compared to classical computing devices, the components
of the Physarum computing plasmodium are remarkably uniform. The
complexity of Physarum computation occurs as an emergent property of
their local interactions, rather than complex features of individual units;
• Massive signal integration: Membrane of plasmodium is able to integrate
massive amounts of complex spatial and time-varying stimuli to effect
local changes in contraction rhythm and, ultimately, global behaviour of
the plasmodium;
• Local connections: micro-volumes and oscillatory bodies of cytoplasm
change their states, due to diffusion and reaction, depending on states
of, or concentrations of, reactants, shape and electrical charges in their
closest neighbours;
• Parallel input and output: Physarum computers by changing its shape,
can record computation optically; Physarum is light sensitive, data can
be input by localised illumination;
• Fault tolerance: being constantly in a shape changing state, Physarum
chip restores its architecture even after a substantial part of its protoplasmic network is removed.

Kolmogorov-Uspensky machines
- https://arxiv.org/abs/1211.5544 


Slime mould cannot function for 50+ years as silicon computer chip do. Such
longevity might be not necessary, cause a practical way could be to make
disposable computers from slime mold.

In laboratory-based experiments presented in Mayne and Adamatzky
(2015b) we developed a nanoscale artificial circuit components by encouraging slime mould to internalize a range of electrically active nanoparticles,
assemble them in vivo and distribute them around the plasmodium. We found
that they hybridized plasmodium is able to form biomorphic mineralized networks inside the living plasmodium and the empty trails left following its migration, both of which facilitate the transmission of electricity.


